Much like a raga, or much like a musical
score, the genome itself is lifeless.
It's the cell that brings it to life. I
think when you somatize the idea that a
mental illness has a physical cause, you
remove a lot of the stigma that is
associated with that illness.
Hello everyone.
In the beginning of his new book, Dr.
Siddhartha Mukherjee quotes American
poet Wallace Stevens, and the quote goes
like this.
In the sum of the parts, there are only
the parts. The world must be measured by
I.
These lines perhaps apply as much to the
subject of the book as well as to Dr.
Mukherjee himself because he is indeed a
man of many parts. The Indian-American
physician is not only an oncologist
doing cutting-edge research in cancer
cure, but he's also a cell biologist, a
hematologist, an entrepreneur, and of
course an author whose 2010 book, The
Emperor of All Maladies, the biography
of cancer,
won the Pulitzer Prize in the category
of general non-fiction.
Dr. Mukherjee is in Bangalore today for
the launch of his book, and we are at
the Biocon campus to meet him.
It is our pleasure and honor to have you
here with us today, doctor. Welcome to
the show. Thank you so much. Hope
Bangalore is treating you well.
Excellent.
I must confess that I'm still reading
the book. It's a fascinating book. I'll
begin by asking for something that
actually struck me initially.
It's not often that a well-researched
scholarly book which promises to explore
medicine and new human, as you put it,
has such an eloquent title. You know,
The Song of the Cell, and chapter names
like healing cell, contemplative cell.
You know, it's almost as if you are
privy to some secret musical performance
by the cells in our bodies. Where did
this title come from? Is there some
truth to this interpretation?
Well, so the title of the the
uh quite late in the book.
Um
in the sense that uh uh
the um
I had almost written the entire book.
The book had a different title
initially. Um and then I began to
realize two things.
Um one is that uh every cell in our
bodies, the cells in our brain, neurons
in our brain,
T cells, B cells in our immune system,
red blood cells,
uh
cells in our body uh except for a few
examples,
essentially share uh
the same uh
genetic code,
the human genome.
But each one,
each cell, takes that same uh human
genome
and makes a unique, I would say, song
out of it.
Um it's a little bit like if you give a
musical score to one orchestra, it'll
play one set tune. If you give the same
musical score to another orchestra,
it'll play another different tune. Or
perhaps in Indian classical music, uh
you know, you have the same set of notes
that comprise a raga. If you give it to
one musician, you'll get a completely
different interpretation.
Give it to another musician, you'll get
a completely different interpretation,
but the core is the same.
Now, much like a raga or much like uh a
musical score,
the
uh the genome itself is lifeless.
It's the cell that brings it to life by,
in some ways, if you want to use a
little bit of poetic license, by singing
it out.
Hence the song of the cell, because each
cell is singing out really a different
tune from the same score.
And then the second interpretation,
which also I realized sort of late in
the book, is that we have
a lot of
uh understanding, a very deepened
understanding,
of uh individual cells,
but we are still trying to figure out
how these pieces fit together. So, a
song is not just something that you hum
internally, but it's also uh a
communication between cells. The
discerning cell, the tolerant cell, the
contemplative cell, these are not
sitting in in in the in a vacuum. They
are coordinating their activities in the
human body. And therefore, that's the
second interpretation of the song.
So, it's really like an orchestra.
It's almost like an orchestra, exactly.
And therefore, again, the song of the
cell. In the beginning, you also
introduce your idea of new human, you
know, and you make it clear that it's
not like Keanu Reeves in the black limo.
It's not a science fiction character,
but it's somebody that a human that who
is built anew.
Right? So, but
whether it is you know, gene
modification or cellular therapy,
there's a lot of ethical and
philosophical debates going on about it.
And in fact, a lot of fear and
skepticism also. Even against science, I
would say generally now. What is your
stand on this? Where do you stand on
this? So, you know, the last few
chapters of the book are really
dedicated to these kinds of fear,
skepticism, ethical considerations, etc.
Um in my second book, in the gene and
intimate history, I really laid out
almost a a kind of triangle,
um which I call the ethical triangle,
within which we can operate, and outside
which we begin to run into trouble. Um
the I let me describe this ethical
triangle to you. One edge of this
ethical triangle is the concept of
suffering and extraordinary suffering.
In other words,
we are doing all of these things. We are
creating, we are making radical
interventions into human bodies, genetic
interventions, cellular interventions.
But the the goal of these interventions,
the first goal of these interventions is
not
augmentation,
but rather the relief of suffering.
Um so, you know, people suffering from
sickle cell anemia, hemophilia, cancer,
autoimmune diseases,
you know, mental illnesses such as
depression,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, etc.,
etc. These are These create an enormous
amount of suffering for some people, but
not for all, but for some people,
infertility
is is is a form of suffering.
IVF,
when it was first created, was so
radical that we were bringing new babies
into the world that were conceived in a
dish.
So, one edge of the triangle is that
what we're trying to do is solve
extraordinary suffering.
The second edge of the triangle is is
what I would call scientific confidence
and safety.
So,
by confidence I mean that what we are
the interventions that we're doing, we
are we have a we have a level of
judgment and confidence that they're
likely to alleviate the extraordinary
suffering. They're not just done for the
sake of doing them.
And that there is that they're safe.
That that they don't compromise
the safety
and that there is there's almost when we
when we perform these interventions, we
do them after we've rigorously analyzed
them, hopefully through rigorously
unbiased clinical trials that have
really inspired our own confidence.
We've applied our own skepticism to them
and they have passed the the concerns
about skepticism.
The third is what I call the humanistic
or aspects of it. So, patient consent,
absence of
fear and absence of
I would say mandates or state-specified
pressures that patients might feel or
individuals might feel to take part in
in in all of this. That there should be
choice,
freedoms,
and in fact
that the that and and autonomy and
agency. I think if all three conditions
in this triangle and we are met and we
stay within the purview of these
triangles, we're actually going to do
some important good medical good. But
there isn't very much public awareness
about
this kind of triangle like you say.
Exactly. Well, the problem is that there
isn't a lot of public awareness about it
and therefore there is a lot of fear and
skepticism. But I think making the
public aware of this of the idea that
there are boundaries and that that that
science can and medicine can operate
within these boundaries and successfully
operate within these boundaries and
alleviate extraordinary suffering is
something that really needs to be
communicated to the public.
In this context, you've recently spoken
you know very movingly about dealing
with your own depression and also
depression with cancer patients,
caregivers and in the depression in
general. You also wrote about it in
Maladies about how doctors become
indifferent to life and death, right?
And when you wrote actually you said in
your article that when you were writing
Song of the Cell, you were a drowning in
what you call dark joylessness. But then
you looked at cells for an explanation
instinctively. Could you elaborate a bit
about how do you think researchers can
you know use cells to cure depression or
even treatment treatment of depression?
Yeah, so I mean let
let's think a little bit about the
complexities of mental illness illness
like depression. First of all, it can be
very debilitating. People think you
know, there's some kind of popular
conception it's sort of like oh you know
you're feeling sad.
It's much more than that
much deeper the sense of grief that
won't pass the inability to inability to
ever experience joy.
And
there it's very clear that there are
psychosocial
situational
things that initiate and modify mental
illness such as depression. So, in my
case it was the death of my father
and there were psychosocial elements,
there were situational elements.
And so no one I think is claiming and
certainly I'm not claiming that the
cause of depression is entirely sitting
in your brain.
But ultimately and this is very
important to realize that ultimately
these psychosocial environmental
situational influences must modify or
change mood regulating
neurons, neuronal circuits, circuits of
neurons, potentially hormonal circuits
in your body, in your brain. And
ultimately they impinge on these and
this is the mechanism by which you get
the get the subjective feeling of the
intensive grief, the inability to move,
so-called psychomotor retardation of
depression.
I think when you somatize and by
somatize I mean bring to the body the
idea that a mental illness has a
physical
correlate, has a physical cause.
You you begin to number one remove some
of the stigma. Because people say you
know you're depressed slap yourself out
of it, right?
But you can't slap your neurons out of
something. No one says slap your
pancreas and now you'll cure your
diabetes. No one says slap your cancer
and you'll get out of your cancer. You
once you understand that there's a
physical biological chemical basis to a
problem to an illness, you remove a lot
of the stigma that is associated with
that illness. That's one very important
piece. The second piece is that you
begin to understand it in at a causal or
mechanistic level. Once you begin to
understand it as a at a causal and
mechanistic level, you can dig into
think about how you can use therapies
against it. Whether they be
medical therapies, treatments, drugs,
whether it be cognitive or behavioral
therapy, so-called talk therapy with
psychiatrists, whether it be deep brain
stimulation, whether it be new kinds of
medications and trials, you all of a
sudden have a new way, a new lens by
which you can look at even an illness
that is that is mental illness. And I
think all of these help towards the
destigmatization, demystification, and
ultimately um
uh you know, a kind of empathy towards
uh the the the the person who is
undergoing this insoluble form of grief
um that we have recognized for for
millennia um which is depression.
You've also spoken
recently about immortality, you know,
and there are many intriguing things
that are being spoken about immortality
now, and you've spoken in Maladies about
how cancer cells also want to become
immortal in a perverse sense.
Today, you know, there's a lot of casual
talk in social media about immortality
being, you know, the brash billionaires'
uh wet dream kind of thing. So, but is
cellular therapy in the real world
really the first step towards a long
life, if not immortality?
Yeah, you know, immortality is something
that is very um I think it's uh spoken
about more than any
than can be realized.
Um
There is a certain capacity, I think, uh
that you can imagine that cellular
therapy can be life-extending.
Um
But um for me as a physician, my quest
is not towards uh
at least immortality in the physical
sense. Uh I'm more interested in the
immortality of ideas, the immortality of
of words, immortality of books. I'm
still reading, you know, I'm still
reading with great reverence uh
uh
uh this an English writer who lived 300
years ago,
um and we're still reading him in
schools.
Um, I'm still I'm still, you know,
reading Emily Dickinson who's, you know,
who's passed away, um, I don't know
what, 100 and something odd years ago.
So, um,
as far as physical immortality is
concerned, um,
I think that right now it doesn't fall
within this ethical triangle I
described. Um,
we it doesn't fall in in the triangle of
extraordinary suffering. I'm not
particularly interested in the
extraordinary suffering of billionaires
who who who are who are pining away, um,
for for immortality. Longevity is a
different thing. Um,
there are diseases that are associated
with uh
shortened lifespan.
There are diseases that are associated
with people who are, um, getting older
and older, uh, osteoarthritis,
osteoporosis, immune collapse, uh,
collapse of, uh, the regenerative system
of their blood. And certainly those
illnesses, uh,
in the in the elderly, um, can be
alleviated by cellular therapy.
Um,
and I'm interested in in in all of that.
I'm interested in longevity and the
diseases that prevent, uh, from us
having dignified longevity. Yeah, I know
what you're just living. I mean, living
and living
Living for the sake of living. But, uh,
immortality, as as you say, as the wet
dream of uh billionaires is not of
interest to me. Yeah.
Tell us a bit more about the company
you've established here in Bangalore
along with Biocon.
Biocon is an investor in the company. It
is we are not a subsidiary, uh,
in any way. There are many investors in
this company.
Um,
the the company's called Immuneel. Um,
we are one of the first, um, there are
some others, but we are certainly one of
the first and among the leaders in
bringing T-cell or CAR T-cell therapy,
uh, which is an entirely novel form of
cellular therapy that can be curative,
um, very important word, curative,
for patients with relapsed refractory
leukemias,
lymphomas, and other diseases.
These are often patients who have who
are no longer responsive to
whatever standard chemotherapies that
are available. So, therefore, their
chances of dying from the disease are
100%.
T-cells, modified genetically engineered
T-cells,
are capable of killing these cancers
even after they have become relapsed and
refractory.
It is an incredible technology.
We are,
you know,
we are
in the process of developing our own
proprietary
T-cells. I mean, making
this is, I would say, akin to sending a
rocket to the moon.
There the amount of work and the amount
of detail detail-orientedness
that you need to develop
T-cell genetically engineered T-cell
therapies for relapsed refractory
leukemias and lymphomas and other
diseases is extraordinary.
And
I'm very proud to be part of this effort
and I'm very proud we announced our
interim results. They're surprisingly,
I would say,
not surprisingly, I should say, they're
astonishingly successful.
The clinical trials have been going on
the past year, if I'm right. Yeah, so we
are the only we are the first to do a
phase 2B clinical trial.
These products are not just safe. We are
evaluating their effectiveness. We have
drawn strong standards about the
effectiveness. So, instead of instead of
sort of figuring out whether they're
effective at, you know, a 1-month
period, which is relatively meaningless,
we're looking at effectiveness in the
90-day period, so at least 3 months and
then potentially going on to several
years
as the clinical trials mature in this
space. But as a company, how do you
intend to, you know, address the
elephant in the room? How to make cancer
treatment more affordable?
So, it is an elephant in the room.
These therapies cost on the order of,
you know, if you count the associated
care and if you count the price of the
drug, if you count in the price of the
previous chemotherapy,
in the United States you're getting to,
you know, $500,000 up to, you know,
$800,000.
So, absurd numbers for
certainly for Indians.
We are trying every piece of ingenuity
to bring the price down.
That said, I said this is like sending a
rocket to the moon.
There is a certain floor beyond which
it's right now, currently, we cannot
bring the price down beyond that because
these because we have to make a novel
virus. We have to genetically engineer
cells. We have to keep with the safety
standards. We have to assure the
regulators that our products are
sterile, effective, and so forth.
As a benchmark, let me give you a
comparison.
I don't know what the price is going to
be. It'll depend on, you know, where we
can as much as we can bring it and make
it more affordable. But as a benchmark,
let me tell you that, you know, at a at
a
accredited
center in the world,
the price of a bone marrow transplant in
India is on the order of 30,000 odd
dollars. This therapy is more effective
than that,
less toxic than that,
and a bone marrow transplant has those
costs or prices because again, there is
a floor. There is a certain amount of
work that is the bottom line that you
have to do in terms of producing a bone
marrow transplant. Um
finally, I should say to you that um
you should think of um this effort, and
I certainly do think of this effort as
the first step in a very long journey.
Um if you never start the journey, uh we
would have never built the first
computer. The first computer was, you
know, cost several hundreds of millions
of dollars um in all making, not the
computer itself, but in the process of
making it. Um the first cell phone, you
know, um costs I don't know the price of
the first cell phone was. I know the
first the cost, by the way, of
sequencing the first genome in human in
humans was uh almost a billion dollars,
right? Now I'm sequencing genomes for uh
300, 400, 600, 800 dollars. So um prices
are almost always reduced as volume
expands, as experience expands, and so
the elephant in the room becomes smaller
and smaller. And the idea is to
ultimately make a small elephant, a baby
elephant, rather than the big elephant.
I'll come to your writing process. I
have noticed in earlier books also,
you're not afraid to write emotionally.
You write personal stories, you know? So
uh is this must be a very difficult
process as a doctor as well as a writer,
you know? How do you deal with this?
Well, I think vulnerability as a writer
is very important to all forms of
writing, not just writing about
medicine. Um I think if if you are an
invulnerable writer, you end up being a
bad poet, you end up being a bad writer,
you can end up It doesn't happen to be
nothing to do with science writing,
nothing to do with medical writing. Um
people want to hear, readers want to
know
what your voice is. Who are you? Um and
it's ironically, the more vulnerable you
are as a writer, the more readers trust
you.
Because they understand that you aren't,
you know, speaking to them from some
lofty position, that in fact the things
that um affect their own lives affect
you as well. Um you know
very famously in medicine, you know, we
want we have this perception of the
doctor as some kind of omniscient,
omnipotent figure who doesn't experience
grief, doesn't experience challenges, is
you know, carrying on mechanically. Um
but in fact that's not true. Medicine is
a very complex profession, emotionally
complex profession. And um I want to um
I want to explore all of that. Um
without that I think I would be a lesser
human being, let alone being a lesser
writer. What kind of a reader are you?
Do you have any favorite authors? Oh
gosh, I'm a prolific reader. I read
everything I can. You know, if you hand
me
uh
a paper flyer, I'll read the paper flyer
because uh
um I love to read. Um I have many
favorite authors. I tend to like to read
poetry a lot. Yeah.
Emily Dickinson is a favorite? One of
them, yeah. And often quote Emily
Dickinson herself.
Um I've uh made the requisite pilgrimage
to her house. Uh
with my daughters I went um
to Emily Dickinson in Amherst,
Massachusetts. Um and what's quite
lovely is uh you know, we have all these
imaginations about how people write.
Emily Dickinson wrote in a in a on a
desk overlooking a window. The desk is
about this big.
Um
and from that desk, you know, she
reinvented modern poetry for all we
know.
Absolutely. Um
of course I've been to Shakespeare's
house
uh in in um at Stratford-on- on on um
Avon. And uh I mean I have many many
many favorite writers. Orwell, um
uh some more contemporary writers. Um
so
uh I read
everything.
And I've also read that you're trained
in music. And but you stopped yourself
from singing because you said there is
not enough grief in my music.
Has anything changed?
Well, so yes, I was trained and I
actually continue to train in music.
I do I have a
jazz ensemble
that I perform with. It's not jazz. I
don't perform jazz, but Indian classical
music Hindustani music I trained for
many many years, continue to train.
Music is very much part of my life. I've
always been interested in music. I I
listen to a lot of music, a lot of very
different kinds of music. I
for instance love flamenco. I love uh
very fond of obviously Indian classical
music.
Very fond of jazz, contemporary jazz,
very fond of contemporary music
um Lovely. Uh so I have very broad taste
in both music and reading. Yeah, yeah,
yeah. But you don't perform because
Actually I do perform.
I perform anonymously. I see. Uh
and I perform with my jazz ensemble
which is called Jog Blues. A J O G
Jog from the rag Jog
Blues from jazz. Okay.
Lovely talking to you, Dr. Mukherjee.
My pleasure. Thank you very much. Thank
you everyone. Thank you for watching.